guides/3_ingest.md, before:

# Building Alex: Part 3 - Ingestion Pipeline with S3 Vectors

Welcome back! In this guide, we'll deploy a cost-effective vector storage solution using AWS S3 Vectors:
- S3 Vectors for vector storage (90% cheaper than OpenSearch!)
- Lambda function for document ingestion  
- API Gateway with API key authentication
- Integration with the SageMaker embedding endpoint

## Prerequisites
- Completed [Guide 1](1_permissions.md) (AWS setup)
- Completed [Guide 2](2_sagemaker.md) (SageMaker deployment)
- AWS CLI configured
- Terraform installed
- Python with `uv` package manager installed

## About S3 Vectors

S3 Vectors is AWS's native vector storage solution, offering 90% cost savings compared to traditional vector databases. It uses a separate namespace (`s3vectors`) from regular S3.

## Step 1: Create S3 Vector Bucket

Since S3 Vectors uses a different namespace than regular S3, we'll create it via the AWS Console:

1. Go to the [S3 Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/s3/)
2. Look for **"Vector buckets"** in the left navigation (not regular buckets)
3. Click **"Create vector bucket"**
4. Configure:
   - Bucket name: `alex-vectors-{your-account-id}` (replace with your actual account ID)
   - Encryption: Keep default (SSE-S3)
5. After creating the bucket, create an index:
   - Index name: `financial-research`
   - Dimension: `384`
   - Distance metric: `Cosine`
6. Click **"Create vector index"**

## Step 2: Prepare the Lambda Deployment Package

The Lambda function code is already in the repository:

```bash
# Navigate to the ingest directory
cd backend/ingest

# Install dependencies and create deployment package
uv run package.py
```

This creates `lambda_function.zip` containing your function and all dependencies. You should see:
```
✅ Deployment package created: lambda_function.zip
   Size: ~15 MB
```

## Step 3: Configure and Deploy the Infrastructure

First, set up the Terraform variables:

```bash
# Navigate to the ingestion terraform directory
cd ../../terraform/3_ingestion

# Copy the example variables file
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

Edit `terraform.tfvars` and set your values:
```hcl
aws_region = "us-east-1"  # Use your DEFAULT_AWS_REGION from .env
sagemaker_endpoint_name = "alex-embedding-endpoint"  # From Part 2
```

Now deploy the infrastructure:

```bash
# Initialize Terraform (creates local state file)
terraform init

# Deploy the infrastructure
terraform apply
```

Type `yes` when prompted. The deployment takes 2-3 minutes.

Note: The Lambda function expects the deployment package to exist at `../../backend/ingest/lambda_function.zip` (which you created in Step 2).

## Step 4: Save Your Configuration

After deployment, Terraform will display important outputs. You need to save these values to your `.env` file.

### Get Your API Key

First, get your API key using the command shown in Terraform output:
```bash
# Replace the ID with the one from your Terraform output
aws apigateway get-api-key --api-key YOUR_API_KEY_ID --include-value --query 'value' --output text
```

### Update Your .env File

Navigate back to project root and update your `.env`:
```bash
cd ../..

nano .env  # or use your preferred editor
```

Add or update these lines in your `.env` file:
```
# From Part 3 - get these values from Terraform output
VECTOR_BUCKET=alex-vectors-YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID
ALEX_API_ENDPOINT=https://xxxxxxxxxx.execute-api.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/prod/ingest
ALEX_API_KEY=your-api-key-here
```

💡 **Tip**: You can view Terraform outputs anytime:
```bash
cd terraform/3_ingestion
terraform output
```

## Step 5: Test the Setup

Test document ingestion directly via S3 Vectors:

```bash
cd backend/ingest
uv run test_ingest_s3vectors.py
```

You should see:
```
✓ Success! Document ID: [uuid]
Testing complete!
```

## Step 6: Test Search

Now test that you can search the documents:

```bash
uv run test_search_s3vectors.py
```

You should see the three documents (Tesla, Amazon, NVIDIA) that were just ingested, and example semantic searches showing how S3 Vectors finds related content.

### Optional: Test via API Gateway

You can also test the API Gateway endpoint directly:

```bash
# Get your API key from .env or Terraform output
curl -X POST $ALEX_API_ENDPOINT \
  -H "x-api-key: $ALEX_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"text": "Test document via API", "metadata": {"source": "api_test"}}'
```

You should see:
```json
{"message": "Document indexed successfully", "document_id": "..."}
```

## Architecture Overview

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[Client] -->|API Key| B[API Gateway]
    B --> C[Lambda Function]
    C --> D[SageMaker Endpoint]
    D -->|Embeddings| C
    C --> E[S3 Vectors]
    
    style E fill:#90EE90,stroke:#228B22,stroke-width:3px
```

## Cost Comparison

| Service | Monthly Cost (Estimate) |
|---------|------------------------|
| OpenSearch Serverless | ~$200-300 |
| S3 Vectors | ~$20-30 |
| **Savings** | **90%!** |

## Troubleshooting

### "Vector bucket not found"
- Ensure you created the bucket with vector configuration enabled
- Check the bucket name matches exactly

### "AccessDenied" errors
- Make sure your IAM user has S3 and S3 Vectors permissions
- The Lambda role needs `s3vectors:*` permissions

### S3 Vectors Command Not Found
- Ensure you have the latest AWS CLI version
- The `s3vectors` commands use a separate namespace from regular S3

### Lambda Handler Errors (500 Internal Server Error)
- Check CloudWatch logs: `aws logs tail /aws/lambda/alex-ingest`
- Verify environment variables are set correctly (SAGEMAKER_ENDPOINT, VECTOR_BUCKET)
- Ensure Lambda IAM role has `s3vectors:PutVectors` permission
- Lambda handler must be `ingest_s3vectors.lambda_handler`

## What's Next?

Congratulations! You now have a cost-effective vector storage solution. The infrastructure includes:
- ✅ S3 bucket with vector capabilities
- ✅ Lambda function for ingesting documents with embeddings
- ✅ API Gateway with secure API key authentication
- ✅ 90% cost savings compared to OpenSearch!

**Important**: Save the Terraform outputs - you'll need them for the next guide.

In [Guide 4](4_researcher.md), we'll deploy the Alex Researcher Agent that uses this infrastructure to provide intelligent investment insights.

## Clean Up (Optional)

If you want to destroy the infrastructure to avoid costs:

```bash
# From the terraform directory
terraform destroy
```

**Note**: This will destroy ALL resources including your SageMaker endpoint. Only do this if you're completely done with the project.

Commit message:

Added a fix to the agent file (thank you Elad B) and referred to it in all guides

guides/3_ingest.md, after:

# Building Alex: Part 3 - Ingestion Pipeline with S3 Vectors

Welcome back! In this guide, we'll deploy a cost-effective vector storage solution using AWS S3 Vectors:
- S3 Vectors for vector storage (90% cheaper than OpenSearch!)
- Lambda function for document ingestion  
- API Gateway with API key authentication
- Integration with the SageMaker embedding endpoint

## Prerequisites
- Completed [Guide 1](1_permissions.md) (AWS setup)
- Completed [Guide 2](2_sagemaker.md) (SageMaker deployment)
- AWS CLI configured
- Terraform installed
- Python with `uv` package manager installed

## REMINDER - MAJOR TIP!!

There's a file `gameplan.md` in the project root that describes the entire Alex project to an AI Agent, so that you can ask questions and get help. There's also an identical `CLAUDE.md` file. If you need help, simply start your favorite AI Agent, and give it this instruction:

> I am a student on the course AI in Production. We are in the course repo. Read the file `gameplan.md` for a briefing on the project. Read this file completely and read all the linked guides carefully. Do not start any work apart from reading and checking directory structure. When you have completed all reading, let me know if you have questions before we get started.

After answering questions, say exactly which guide you're on and any issues. Be careful to validate every suggestion; always ask for the root cause and evidence of problems. LLMs have a tendency to jump to conclusions, but they often correct themselves when they need to provide evidence.

## About S3 Vectors

S3 Vectors is AWS's native vector storage solution, offering 90% cost savings compared to traditional vector databases. It uses a separate namespace (`s3vectors`) from regular S3.

## Step 1: Create S3 Vector Bucket

Since S3 Vectors uses a different namespace than regular S3, we'll create it via the AWS Console:

1. Go to the [S3 Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/s3/)
2. Look for **"Vector buckets"** in the left navigation (not regular buckets)
3. Click **"Create vector bucket"**
4. Configure:
   - Bucket name: `alex-vectors-{your-account-id}` (replace with your actual account ID)
   - Encryption: Keep default (SSE-S3)
5. After creating the bucket, create an index:
   - Index name: `financial-research`
   - Dimension: `384`
   - Distance metric: `Cosine`
6. Click **"Create vector index"**

## Step 2: Prepare the Lambda Deployment Package

The Lambda function code is already in the repository:

```bash
# Navigate to the ingest directory
cd backend/ingest

# Install dependencies and create deployment package
uv run package.py
```

This creates `lambda_function.zip` containing your function and all dependencies. You should see:
```
✅ Deployment package created: lambda_function.zip
   Size: ~15 MB
```

## Step 3: Configure and Deploy the Infrastructure

First, set up the Terraform variables:

```bash
# Navigate to the ingestion terraform directory
cd ../../terraform/3_ingestion

# Copy the example variables file
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

Edit `terraform.tfvars` and set your values:
```hcl
aws_region = "us-east-1"  # Use your DEFAULT_AWS_REGION from .env
sagemaker_endpoint_name = "alex-embedding-endpoint"  # From Part 2
```

Now deploy the infrastructure:

```bash
# Initialize Terraform (creates local state file)
terraform init

# Deploy the infrastructure
terraform apply
```

Type `yes` when prompted. The deployment takes 2-3 minutes.

Note: The Lambda function expects the deployment package to exist at `../../backend/ingest/lambda_function.zip` (which you created in Step 2).

## Step 4: Save Your Configuration

After deployment, Terraform will display important outputs. You need to save these values to your `.env` file.

### Get Your API Key

First, get your API key using the command shown in Terraform output:
```bash
# Replace the ID with the one from your Terraform output
aws apigateway get-api-key --api-key YOUR_API_KEY_ID --include-value --query 'value' --output text
```

### Update Your .env File

Navigate back to project root and update your `.env`:
```bash
cd ../..

nano .env  # or use your preferred editor
```

Add or update these lines in your `.env` file:
```
# From Part 3 - get these values from Terraform output
VECTOR_BUCKET=alex-vectors-YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID
ALEX_API_ENDPOINT=https://xxxxxxxxxx.execute-api.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/prod/ingest
ALEX_API_KEY=your-api-key-here
```

💡 **Tip**: You can view Terraform outputs anytime:
```bash
cd terraform/3_ingestion
terraform output
```

## Step 5: Test the Setup

Test document ingestion directly via S3 Vectors:

```bash
cd backend/ingest
uv run test_ingest_s3vectors.py
```

You should see:
```
✓ Success! Document ID: [uuid]
Testing complete!
```

## Step 6: Test Search

Now test that you can search the documents:

```bash
uv run test_search_s3vectors.py
```

You should see the three documents (Tesla, Amazon, NVIDIA) that were just ingested, and example semantic searches showing how S3 Vectors finds related content.

### Optional: Test via API Gateway

You can also test the API Gateway endpoint directly:

```bash
# Get your API key from .env or Terraform output
curl -X POST $ALEX_API_ENDPOINT \
  -H "x-api-key: $ALEX_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"text": "Test document via API", "metadata": {"source": "api_test"}}'
```

You should see:
```json
{"message": "Document indexed successfully", "document_id": "..."}
```

## Architecture Overview

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[Client] -->|API Key| B[API Gateway]
    B --> C[Lambda Function]
    C --> D[SageMaker Endpoint]
    D -->|Embeddings| C
    C --> E[S3 Vectors]
    
    style E fill:#90EE90,stroke:#228B22,stroke-width:3px
```

## Cost Comparison

| Service | Monthly Cost (Estimate) |
|---------|------------------------|
| OpenSearch Serverless | ~$200-300 |
| S3 Vectors | ~$20-30 |
| **Savings** | **90%!** |

## Troubleshooting

### "Vector bucket not found"
- Ensure you created the bucket with vector configuration enabled
- Check the bucket name matches exactly

### "AccessDenied" errors
- Make sure your IAM user has S3 and S3 Vectors permissions
- The Lambda role needs `s3vectors:*` permissions

### S3 Vectors Command Not Found
- Ensure you have the latest AWS CLI version
- The `s3vectors` commands use a separate namespace from regular S3

### Lambda Handler Errors (500 Internal Server Error)
- Check CloudWatch logs: `aws logs tail /aws/lambda/alex-ingest`
- Verify environment variables are set correctly (SAGEMAKER_ENDPOINT, VECTOR_BUCKET)
- Ensure Lambda IAM role has `s3vectors:PutVectors` permission
- Lambda handler must be `ingest_s3vectors.lambda_handler`

## What's Next?

Congratulations! You now have a cost-effective vector storage solution. The infrastructure includes:
- ✅ S3 bucket with vector capabilities
- ✅ Lambda function for ingesting documents with embeddings
- ✅ API Gateway with secure API key authentication
- ✅ 90% cost savings compared to OpenSearch!

**Important**: Save the Terraform outputs - you'll need them for the next guide.

In [Guide 4](4_researcher.md), we'll deploy the Alex Researcher Agent that uses this infrastructure to provide intelligent investment insights.

## Clean Up (Optional)

If you want to destroy the infrastructure to avoid costs:

```bash
# From the terraform directory
terraform destroy
```

**Note**: This will destroy ALL resources including your SageMaker endpoint. Only do this if you're completely done with the project.
