guides/7_frontend.md, before:

# Building Alex: Part 7 - Frontend & API

Welcome to the final development phase! In this guide, you'll deploy the user interface that brings Alex to life - a modern React application with real-time agent visualization, portfolio management, and comprehensive financial analysis displays.

## What You're Building

You'll deploy a complete SaaS frontend with:
- **Authentication**: Clerk-based sign-in/sign-up with automatic user creation
- **Portfolio Management**: Add accounts, track positions, edit holdings
- **AI Analysis**: Trigger and monitor multi-agent analysis with real-time progress
- **Interactive Reports**: Markdown reports, dynamic charts, retirement projections
- **Production Infrastructure**: CloudFront CDN, API Gateway, Lambda backend

Here's the complete architecture:

```mermaid
graph TB
    User[User Browser] -->|HTTPS| CF[CloudFront CDN]
    CF -->|Static Files| S3[S3 Static Site]
    CF -->|/api/*| APIG[API Gateway]

    User -->|Auth| Clerk[Clerk Auth]
    APIG -->|JWT| Lambda[API Lambda]

    Lambda -->|Data API| Aurora[(Aurora DB)]
    Lambda -->|Trigger| SQS[SQS Queue]

    SQS -->|Process| Agents[AI Agents]
    Agents -->|Results| Aurora

    style CF fill:#FF9900
    style S3 fill:#569A31
    style Lambda fill:#FF9900
    style Clerk fill:#6C5CE7
```

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:
- Completed Guides 1-6 (all backend infrastructure deployed)
- AWS CLI configured
- Node.js 20+ and npm installed
- Python with `uv` package manager
- Terraform installed
- A Clerk account (free tier is fine)

## Step 1: Set Up Clerk Authentication

We'll use Clerk for authentication - the same service from earlier in the course. If you already have Clerk credentials from a previous project, you can reuse them.

### 1.1 Get Your Clerk Credentials

If you have Clerk credentials from a previous project:
1. Sign in to [Clerk Dashboard](https://dashboard.clerk.com)
2. Select your existing application
3. Navigate to **API Keys** in the left sidebar
4. You'll need:
   - Publishable Key (starts with `pk_`)
   - Secret Key (starts with `sk_`)
   - JWKS Endpoint URL (found under **Show JWT Public Key** → **JWKS Endpoint**)

If you need to create a new Clerk application:
1. Sign up at [clerk.com](https://clerk.com)
2. Create a new application
3. Choose **Email** and optionally **Google** for sign-in methods
4. Get your keys from the API Keys section

### 1.2 Configure Frontend Environment

Create `.env.local` in the frontend directory in Cursor and add your Clerk credentials:

```bash
# Clerk Authentication (use your existing keys if you have them)
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY=pk_test_your-key-here
CLERK_SECRET_KEY=sk_test_your-secret-here

# Sign-in/up redirects (these are already set correctly)
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_AFTER_SIGN_IN_URL=/dashboard
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_AFTER_SIGN_UP_URL=/dashboard

# API URL - use localhost for local development, AWS URL for production
NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:8000
```

### 1.3 Configure Backend Environment

Now add Clerk configuration to your root `.env` file:

```bash
# In your alex directory root .env file, add:

# Part 7 - Clerk Authentication
CLERK_JWKS_URL=https://your-app.clerk.accounts.dev/.well-known/jwks.json
```

To find your JWKS URL:
1. Go to Clerk Dashboard → **API Keys**
2. Click **Show JWT Public Key**
3. Copy the **JWKS Endpoint** URL

## Step 2: Test Frontend Locally

Let's verify the frontend works before deploying.

### 2.1 Install Dependencies

Navigate to the frontend directory and install packages:

```bash
# In alex/frontend directory
npm install
```

This installs React, NextJS, Tailwind CSS, and other dependencies.

### 2.2 Start Development Servers

We'll run both the backend API and frontend together:

```bash
# Navigate to scripts directory
# Go to alex/scripts in your terminal

# Start both frontend and backend
uv run run_local.py
```

You should see:
```
🚀 Starting FastAPI backend...
  ✅ Backend running at http://localhost:8000
     API docs: http://localhost:8000/docs

🚀 Starting NextJS frontend...
  ✅ Frontend running at http://localhost:3000
```

### 2.3 Explore the Application

Open your browser and visit [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)

1. **Landing Page**: You'll see the Alex AI Financial Advisor homepage
2. **Sign In**: Click "Sign In" and create an account or use existing Clerk credentials
3. **Dashboard**: After sign-in, you're redirected to the dashboard
4. **User Creation**: The system automatically creates your user profile in the database

### 2.4 Explore API Documentation

Open [http://localhost:8000/docs](http://localhost:8000/docs) to see the Swagger API documentation.

This interactive documentation shows:
- All available API endpoints
- Request/response schemas
- Authentication requirements
- Try-it-out functionality (requires JWT token)

Key endpoints:
- `GET /api/user` - Get or create user profile
- `GET /api/accounts` - List investment accounts
- `POST /api/positions` - Add positions to accounts
- `POST /api/analyze` - Trigger AI analysis
- `GET /api/jobs/{job_id}` - Check analysis status

## Step 3: Add Test Portfolio Data

Let's create a sample portfolio to work with.

### 3.1 Navigate to Accounts Page

1. Click **Accounts** in the navigation bar
2. You'll see "No accounts found"
3. Click **Populate Test Data** button

The system creates:
- 3 accounts (401k, Roth IRA, Taxable)
- Various ETF and stock positions
- Cash balances

### 3.2 Explore Account Management

Click on any account to:
- View positions with current values
- Edit position quantities
- Add new positions
- Delete positions
- Update cash balance

Try editing a position:
1. Click the edit icon next to any position
2. Change the quantity
3. Click save
4. See the value update automatically

**Note**: The AI analysis features require the AWS infrastructure to be deployed. You can explore portfolio management locally, but analysis will only work after deployment.

## Step 4: Deploy Infrastructure

Now let's deploy to AWS for production use.

### 4.1 Configure Terraform

Navigate to the terraform directory for Part 7:

```bash
# Go to alex/terraform/7_frontend directory

# Copy example variables
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

Edit `terraform.tfvars` in Cursor:

```hcl
# AWS region for deployment
aws_region = "us-east-1"

# Clerk configuration for JWT validation
# Get these from your Clerk dashboard
# The JWKS URL is: https://[your-instance].clerk.accounts.dev/.well-known/jwks.json
# The issuer is: https://[your-instance].clerk.accounts.dev
clerk_jwks_url = "https://engaging-feline-80.clerk.accounts.dev/.well-known/jwks.json"
clerk_issuer   = "https://engaging-feline-80.clerk.accounts.dev"
```

To find your AWS account ID:
```bash
aws sts get-caller-identity --query Account --output text
```

### 4.2 Package the API Lambda

Navigate to the backend/api directory and package the Lambda:

```bash
# In alex/backend/api directory
uv run package_docker.py
```

This creates `api_lambda.zip` with all dependencies. Takes about 1 minute.

### 4.3 Deploy Infrastructure

Navigate back to the terraform directory and deploy:

```bash
# In alex/terraform/7_frontend directory

# Initialize Terraform
terraform init

# Review what will be created
terraform plan

# Deploy infrastructure
terraform apply
```

Type `yes` when prompted. This creates:
- S3 bucket for static frontend
- CloudFront CDN distribution
- API Gateway with Lambda integration
- Lambda function for API
- IAM roles and policies

Deployment takes 10-15 minutes (CloudFront takes time).

### 4.4 Save Important Outputs

After deployment, save the outputs:

```bash
terraform output
```

You'll see:
- `cloudfront_url` - Your frontend URL
- `api_gateway_url` - Your API endpoint
- `s3_bucket` - Frontend bucket name

Also update your root `.env` file with the SQS queue URL from Part 6:

```bash
# Check Part 6 outputs if you don't have this
# In alex/terraform/6_agents directory
terraform output sqs_queue_url

# Add to your .env file:
SQS_QUEUE_URL=https://sqs.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/123456789012/alex-analysis-jobs
```

## Step 5: Deploy Frontend Code

Now let's build and deploy the frontend application.

### 5.1 Build Frontend

Navigate to the frontend directory:

```bash
# In alex/frontend directory

# Build production version
npm run build
```

This creates an optimized production build in the `out` directory.

### 5.2 Deploy to S3

Navigate to the scripts directory and run the deployment:

```bash
# In alex/scripts directory

# Deploy frontend to S3 and invalidate CloudFront cache
uv run deploy.py
```

This script:
1. Uploads built files to S3
2. Sets correct content types
3. Invalidates CloudFront cache
4. Takes about 2 minutes

## Step 6: Test Production Deployment

### 6.1 Access Your Application

Open the CloudFront URL from the Terraform output in your browser:
```
https://d1234567890.cloudfront.net
```

1. **Sign In**: Use your Clerk credentials
2. **Dashboard**: Verify it loads correctly
3. **API Calls**: Check that data loads

### 6.2 Test Portfolio Management

1. Navigate to **Accounts**
2. Click **Populate Test Data** if needed
3. Edit a position to verify updates work
4. Add a new position

## Step 7: Run AI Analysis in Production

Now that everything is deployed, let's run the AI analysis!

### 7.1 Navigate to Advisor Team

Click **Advisor Team** in the navigation. You'll see four specialist agents:
- 🎯 **Financial Planner** - Orchestrates the analysis
- 📊 **Portfolio Analyst** - Analyzes holdings and performance
- 📈 **Chart Specialist** - Creates visualizations
- 🎯 **Retirement Planner** - Projects retirement scenarios

Note: The fifth agent (InstrumentTagger) runs invisibly when needed.

### 7.2 Start Analysis

1. Click the **Start New Analysis** button (purple, prominent)
2. Watch the progress visualization:
   - Financial Planner lights up first
   - Then three agents work in parallel
   - Each agent shows a glowing effect when active
3. Wait 60-90 seconds for completion
4. Automatically redirects to the Analysis page

### 7.3 Review Analysis Results

The Analysis page has four tabs:

**Overview Tab**:
- Executive summary
- Key observations
- Risk assessment
- Recommendations

**Charts Tab**:
- Asset allocation pie chart
- Geographic exposure
- Sector breakdown
- Top holdings

**Retirement Tab**:
- Monte Carlo simulation results
- Success probability
- Portfolio projections
- Retirement readiness score

**Recommendations Tab**:
- Specific action items
- Rebalancing suggestions
- Risk adjustments

## Step 8: Monitor in AWS Console

Let's explore what's happening behind the scenes.

### 8.1 CloudWatch Logs

1. Go to [CloudWatch Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch)
2. Click **Log groups**
3. Find `/aws/lambda/alex-api`
4. Click on the latest log stream
5. You'll see API requests and responses

### 8.2 API Gateway Metrics

1. Go to [API Gateway Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/apigateway)
2. Click on `alex-api`
3. Click **Dashboard** in the left sidebar
4. View request counts, latency, and errors

### 8.3 Lambda Performance

1. Go to [Lambda Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/lambda)
2. Click on `alex-api`
3. Click **Monitor** tab
4. View invocations, duration, and errors
5. Check concurrent executions

### 8.4 SQS Queue Activity

When you trigger an analysis:

1. Go to [SQS Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/sqs)
2. Click on `alex-analysis-jobs`
3. Watch **Messages Available** change
4. Check **Monitoring** tab for metrics

### 8.5 CloudFront Distribution

1. Go to [CloudFront Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudfront)
2. Click on your distribution
3. Check **Monitoring** tab for:
   - Requests per second
   - Cache hit ratio
   - Data transfer
   - Origin requests

## Step 9: Cost Monitoring

As a responsible AWS user, always monitor costs:

### 9.1 Check Current Costs

1. Sign in as your AWS root user
2. Go to [Billing Dashboard](https://console.aws.amazon.com/billing)
3. Check **Bills** for current month
4. Review service breakdown

### 9.2 Expected Costs

For this complete application:
- **Lambda**: < $1/month (pay per invocation)
- **API Gateway**: < $4/month (1M requests free tier)
- **Aurora**: $43-60/month (biggest cost)
- **S3 & CloudFront**: < $1/month for development
- **SQS**: < $1/month
- **CloudWatch**: < $5/month
- **Bedrock**: $0.01-0.10 per analysis

**Total**: ~$50-70/month during development

### 9.3 Cost Optimization

To reduce costs when not actively developing:

```bash
# Stop Aurora to save ~$43/month
# In alex/terraform/5_database directory
terraform destroy

# Or destroy everything
# Run in each terraform directory in reverse order (7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2)
terraform destroy
```

## Troubleshooting

### Frontend Won't Build

If `npm run build` fails:
1. Check Node.js version (needs 20+)
2. Delete `node_modules` and `.next` directories
3. Run `npm install` again
4. Check for TypeScript errors

### API Returns 401 Unauthorized

If API calls fail with 401:
1. Verify Clerk keys in `.env.local`
2. Check JWKS URL in Lambda environment variables
3. Sign out and sign in again
4. Check token expiry (Clerk tokens expire after 1 hour)

### Analysis Doesn't Start

If analysis stays pending:
1. Check SQS queue for messages
2. Verify planner Lambda has SQS trigger
3. Check CloudWatch logs for errors
4. Ensure Aurora cluster is running

### CloudFront Returns 403

If you get access denied:
1. Check S3 bucket policy
2. Verify CloudFront OAI has access
3. Wait 15 minutes for propagation
4. Try incognito browser window

### Charts Don't Display

If charts are blank:
1. Check browser console for errors
2. Verify chart data in job results
3. Check Recharts library loaded
4. Review charter agent output

## Architecture Best Practices

### Security Highlights

The application implements several security best practices:

1. **Authentication**: Clerk handles all auth complexity
2. **JWT Validation**: Every API request validates tokens
3. **HTTPS Only**: CloudFront enforces SSL
4. **Input Validation**: Pydantic validates all data
5. **CORS Protection**: Restricts origins
6. **Secrets Management**: Uses AWS Secrets Manager

### Performance Optimizations

1. **CDN Caching**: Static assets cached globally
2. **Code Splitting**: NextJS automatically splits bundles
3. **API Response Caching**: CloudFront caches GET requests
4. **Database Connection Pooling**: Data API handles pooling
5. **Parallel Agent Execution**: Agents run simultaneously

### Scalability Design

The architecture scales automatically:
- **CloudFront**: Handles millions of requests
- **API Gateway**: Auto-scales to demand
- **Lambda**: Concurrent execution up to 1000
- **Aurora Serverless**: Scales ACUs as needed
- **SQS**: Manages queue automatically

## Next Steps

Congratulations! You've deployed a complete AI-powered financial planning application!

### Explore Advanced Features

Try these additional features:
1. Create multiple accounts with different strategies
2. Test with international ETFs
3. Adjust retirement parameters
4. Export reports (print to PDF)

### Customize the Application

Ideas for enhancement:
- Add more chart types
- Implement portfolio rebalancing
- Add email notifications
- Create mobile app
- Integrate with brokerages

### Continue Learning

Proceed to [Guide 8](8_observability.md) where you'll add:
- Comprehensive monitoring with CloudWatch
- Distributed tracing with X-Ray
- Security scanning
- Performance optimization

## Summary

In this guide, you successfully:
- ✅ Set up Clerk authentication
- ✅ Deployed a React/NextJS frontend
- ✅ Created a FastAPI backend on Lambda
- ✅ Configured CloudFront CDN
- ✅ Tested portfolio management
- ✅ Ran multi-agent AI analysis
- ✅ Monitored costs and performance

Your Alex Financial Advisor is now live and ready for users! 🎉

## Quick Reference

### Key URLs
- **Frontend**: Your CloudFront URL
- **API Docs**: Your API Gateway URL + `/docs`
- **Clerk Dashboard**: https://dashboard.clerk.com

### Common Commands
```bash
# Local development
uv run run_local.py

# Deploy frontend
npm run build
uv run deploy.py

# Check costs
aws ce get-cost-and-usage --time-period Start=2024-01-01,End=2024-01-31 --granularity MONTHLY --metrics "UnblendedCost" --group-by Type=DIMENSION,Key=SERVICE

# View logs
aws logs tail /aws/lambda/alex-api --follow
```

### Cost Management
- Set up billing alerts
- Review costs weekly
- Destroy resources when not needed
- Use AWS Free Tier where possible

Excellent work completing the Alex Financial Advisor! 🚀

Commit message:

Added a fix to the agent file (thank you Elad B) and referred to it in all guides

guides/7_frontend.md, after:

# Building Alex: Part 7 - Frontend & API

Welcome to the final development phase! In this guide, you'll deploy the user interface that brings Alex to life - a modern React application with real-time agent visualization, portfolio management, and comprehensive financial analysis displays.

## REMINDER - MAJOR TIP!!

There's a file `gameplan.md` in the project root that describes the entire Alex project to an AI Agent, so that you can ask questions and get help. There's also an identical `CLAUDE.md` file. If you need help, simply start your favorite AI Agent, and give it this instruction:

> I am a student on the course AI in Production. We are in the course repo. Read the file `gameplan.md` for a briefing on the project. Read this file completely and read all the linked guides carefully. Do not start any work apart from reading and checking directory structure. When you have completed all reading, let me know if you have questions before we get started.

After answering questions, say exactly which guide you're on and any issues. Be careful to validate every suggestion; always ask for the root cause and evidence of problems. LLMs have a tendency to jump to conclusions, but they often correct themselves when they need to provide evidence.

## What You're Building

You'll deploy a complete SaaS frontend with:
- **Authentication**: Clerk-based sign-in/sign-up with automatic user creation
- **Portfolio Management**: Add accounts, track positions, edit holdings
- **AI Analysis**: Trigger and monitor multi-agent analysis with real-time progress
- **Interactive Reports**: Markdown reports, dynamic charts, retirement projections
- **Production Infrastructure**: CloudFront CDN, API Gateway, Lambda backend

Here's the complete architecture:

```mermaid
graph TB
    User[User Browser] -->|HTTPS| CF[CloudFront CDN]
    CF -->|Static Files| S3[S3 Static Site]
    CF -->|/api/*| APIG[API Gateway]

    User -->|Auth| Clerk[Clerk Auth]
    APIG -->|JWT| Lambda[API Lambda]

    Lambda -->|Data API| Aurora[(Aurora DB)]
    Lambda -->|Trigger| SQS[SQS Queue]

    SQS -->|Process| Agents[AI Agents]
    Agents -->|Results| Aurora

    style CF fill:#FF9900
    style S3 fill:#569A31
    style Lambda fill:#FF9900
    style Clerk fill:#6C5CE7
```

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:
- Completed Guides 1-6 (all backend infrastructure deployed)
- AWS CLI configured
- Node.js 20+ and npm installed
- Python with `uv` package manager
- Terraform installed
- A Clerk account (free tier is fine)

## Step 1: Set Up Clerk Authentication

We'll use Clerk for authentication - the same service from earlier in the course. If you already have Clerk credentials from a previous project, you can reuse them.

### 1.1 Get Your Clerk Credentials

If you have Clerk credentials from a previous project:
1. Sign in to [Clerk Dashboard](https://dashboard.clerk.com)
2. Select your existing application
3. Navigate to **API Keys** in the left sidebar
4. You'll need:
   - Publishable Key (starts with `pk_`)
   - Secret Key (starts with `sk_`)
   - JWKS Endpoint URL (found under **Show JWT Public Key** → **JWKS Endpoint**)

If you need to create a new Clerk application:
1. Sign up at [clerk.com](https://clerk.com)
2. Create a new application
3. Choose **Email** and optionally **Google** for sign-in methods
4. Get your keys from the API Keys section

### 1.2 Configure Frontend Environment

Create `.env.local` in the frontend directory in Cursor and add your Clerk credentials:

```bash
# Clerk Authentication (use your existing keys if you have them)
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY=pk_test_your-key-here
CLERK_SECRET_KEY=sk_test_your-secret-here

# Sign-in/up redirects (these are already set correctly)
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_AFTER_SIGN_IN_URL=/dashboard
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_AFTER_SIGN_UP_URL=/dashboard

# API URL - use localhost for local development, AWS URL for production
NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:8000
```

### 1.3 Configure Backend Environment

Now add Clerk configuration to your root `.env` file:

```bash
# In your alex directory root .env file, add:

# Part 7 - Clerk Authentication
CLERK_JWKS_URL=https://your-app.clerk.accounts.dev/.well-known/jwks.json
```

To find your JWKS URL:
1. Go to Clerk Dashboard → **API Keys**
2. Click **Show JWT Public Key**
3. Copy the **JWKS Endpoint** URL

## Step 2: Test Frontend Locally

Let's verify the frontend works before deploying.

### 2.1 Install Dependencies

Navigate to the frontend directory and install packages:

```bash
# In alex/frontend directory
npm install
```

This installs React, NextJS, Tailwind CSS, and other dependencies.

### 2.2 Start Development Servers

We'll run both the backend API and frontend together:

```bash
# Navigate to scripts directory
# Go to alex/scripts in your terminal

# Start both frontend and backend
uv run run_local.py
```

You should see:
```
🚀 Starting FastAPI backend...
  ✅ Backend running at http://localhost:8000
     API docs: http://localhost:8000/docs

🚀 Starting NextJS frontend...
  ✅ Frontend running at http://localhost:3000
```

### 2.3 Explore the Application

Open your browser and visit [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000)

1. **Landing Page**: You'll see the Alex AI Financial Advisor homepage
2. **Sign In**: Click "Sign In" and create an account or use existing Clerk credentials
3. **Dashboard**: After sign-in, you're redirected to the dashboard
4. **User Creation**: The system automatically creates your user profile in the database

### 2.4 Explore API Documentation

Open [http://localhost:8000/docs](http://localhost:8000/docs) to see the Swagger API documentation.

This interactive documentation shows:
- All available API endpoints
- Request/response schemas
- Authentication requirements
- Try-it-out functionality (requires JWT token)

Key endpoints:
- `GET /api/user` - Get or create user profile
- `GET /api/accounts` - List investment accounts
- `POST /api/positions` - Add positions to accounts
- `POST /api/analyze` - Trigger AI analysis
- `GET /api/jobs/{job_id}` - Check analysis status

## Step 3: Add Test Portfolio Data

Let's create a sample portfolio to work with.

### 3.1 Navigate to Accounts Page

1. Click **Accounts** in the navigation bar
2. You'll see "No accounts found"
3. Click **Populate Test Data** button

The system creates:
- 3 accounts (401k, Roth IRA, Taxable)
- Various ETF and stock positions
- Cash balances

### 3.2 Explore Account Management

Click on any account to:
- View positions with current values
- Edit position quantities
- Add new positions
- Delete positions
- Update cash balance

Try editing a position:
1. Click the edit icon next to any position
2. Change the quantity
3. Click save
4. See the value update automatically

**Note**: The AI analysis features require the AWS infrastructure to be deployed. You can explore portfolio management locally, but analysis will only work after deployment.

## Step 4: Deploy Infrastructure

Now let's deploy to AWS for production use.

### 4.1 Configure Terraform

Navigate to the terraform directory for Part 7:

```bash
# Go to alex/terraform/7_frontend directory

# Copy example variables
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

Edit `terraform.tfvars` in Cursor:

```hcl
# AWS region for deployment
aws_region = "us-east-1"

# Clerk configuration for JWT validation
# Get these from your Clerk dashboard
# The JWKS URL is: https://[your-instance].clerk.accounts.dev/.well-known/jwks.json
# The issuer is: https://[your-instance].clerk.accounts.dev
clerk_jwks_url = "https://engaging-feline-80.clerk.accounts.dev/.well-known/jwks.json"
clerk_issuer   = "https://engaging-feline-80.clerk.accounts.dev"
```

To find your AWS account ID:
```bash
aws sts get-caller-identity --query Account --output text
```

### 4.2 Package the API Lambda

Navigate to the backend/api directory and package the Lambda:

```bash
# In alex/backend/api directory
uv run package_docker.py
```

This creates `api_lambda.zip` with all dependencies. Takes about 1 minute.

### 4.3 Deploy Infrastructure

Navigate back to the terraform directory and deploy:

```bash
# In alex/terraform/7_frontend directory

# Initialize Terraform
terraform init

# Review what will be created
terraform plan

# Deploy infrastructure
terraform apply
```

Type `yes` when prompted. This creates:
- S3 bucket for static frontend
- CloudFront CDN distribution
- API Gateway with Lambda integration
- Lambda function for API
- IAM roles and policies

Deployment takes 10-15 minutes (CloudFront takes time).

### 4.4 Save Important Outputs

After deployment, save the outputs:

```bash
terraform output
```

You'll see:
- `cloudfront_url` - Your frontend URL
- `api_gateway_url` - Your API endpoint
- `s3_bucket` - Frontend bucket name

Also update your root `.env` file with the SQS queue URL from Part 6:

```bash
# Check Part 6 outputs if you don't have this
# In alex/terraform/6_agents directory
terraform output sqs_queue_url

# Add to your .env file:
SQS_QUEUE_URL=https://sqs.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/123456789012/alex-analysis-jobs
```

## Step 5: Deploy Frontend Code

Now let's build and deploy the frontend application.

### 5.1 Build Frontend

Navigate to the frontend directory:

```bash
# In alex/frontend directory

# Build production version
npm run build
```

This creates an optimized production build in the `out` directory.

### 5.2 Deploy to S3

Navigate to the scripts directory and run the deployment:

```bash
# In alex/scripts directory

# Deploy frontend to S3 and invalidate CloudFront cache
uv run deploy.py
```

This script:
1. Uploads built files to S3
2. Sets correct content types
3. Invalidates CloudFront cache
4. Takes about 2 minutes

## Step 6: Test Production Deployment

### 6.1 Access Your Application

Open the CloudFront URL from the Terraform output in your browser:
```
https://d1234567890.cloudfront.net
```

1. **Sign In**: Use your Clerk credentials
2. **Dashboard**: Verify it loads correctly
3. **API Calls**: Check that data loads

### 6.2 Test Portfolio Management

1. Navigate to **Accounts**
2. Click **Populate Test Data** if needed
3. Edit a position to verify updates work
4. Add a new position

## Step 7: Run AI Analysis in Production

Now that everything is deployed, let's run the AI analysis!

### 7.1 Navigate to Advisor Team

Click **Advisor Team** in the navigation. You'll see four specialist agents:
- 🎯 **Financial Planner** - Orchestrates the analysis
- 📊 **Portfolio Analyst** - Analyzes holdings and performance
- 📈 **Chart Specialist** - Creates visualizations
- 🎯 **Retirement Planner** - Projects retirement scenarios

Note: The fifth agent (InstrumentTagger) runs invisibly when needed.

### 7.2 Start Analysis

1. Click the **Start New Analysis** button (purple, prominent)
2. Watch the progress visualization:
   - Financial Planner lights up first
   - Then three agents work in parallel
   - Each agent shows a glowing effect when active
3. Wait 60-90 seconds for completion
4. Automatically redirects to the Analysis page

### 7.3 Review Analysis Results

The Analysis page has four tabs:

**Overview Tab**:
- Executive summary
- Key observations
- Risk assessment
- Recommendations

**Charts Tab**:
- Asset allocation pie chart
- Geographic exposure
- Sector breakdown
- Top holdings

**Retirement Tab**:
- Monte Carlo simulation results
- Success probability
- Portfolio projections
- Retirement readiness score

**Recommendations Tab**:
- Specific action items
- Rebalancing suggestions
- Risk adjustments

## Step 8: Monitor in AWS Console

Let's explore what's happening behind the scenes.

### 8.1 CloudWatch Logs

1. Go to [CloudWatch Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch)
2. Click **Log groups**
3. Find `/aws/lambda/alex-api`
4. Click on the latest log stream
5. You'll see API requests and responses

### 8.2 API Gateway Metrics

1. Go to [API Gateway Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/apigateway)
2. Click on `alex-api`
3. Click **Dashboard** in the left sidebar
4. View request counts, latency, and errors

### 8.3 Lambda Performance

1. Go to [Lambda Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/lambda)
2. Click on `alex-api`
3. Click **Monitor** tab
4. View invocations, duration, and errors
5. Check concurrent executions

### 8.4 SQS Queue Activity

When you trigger an analysis:

1. Go to [SQS Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/sqs)
2. Click on `alex-analysis-jobs`
3. Watch **Messages Available** change
4. Check **Monitoring** tab for metrics

### 8.5 CloudFront Distribution

1. Go to [CloudFront Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudfront)
2. Click on your distribution
3. Check **Monitoring** tab for:
   - Requests per second
   - Cache hit ratio
   - Data transfer
   - Origin requests

## Step 9: Cost Monitoring

As a responsible AWS user, always monitor costs:

### 9.1 Check Current Costs

1. Sign in as your AWS root user
2. Go to [Billing Dashboard](https://console.aws.amazon.com/billing)
3. Check **Bills** for current month
4. Review service breakdown

### 9.2 Expected Costs

For this complete application:
- **Lambda**: < $1/month (pay per invocation)
- **API Gateway**: < $4/month (1M requests free tier)
- **Aurora**: $43-60/month (biggest cost)
- **S3 & CloudFront**: < $1/month for development
- **SQS**: < $1/month
- **CloudWatch**: < $5/month
- **Bedrock**: $0.01-0.10 per analysis

**Total**: ~$50-70/month during development

### 9.3 Cost Optimization

To reduce costs when not actively developing:

```bash
# Stop Aurora to save ~$43/month
# In alex/terraform/5_database directory
terraform destroy

# Or destroy everything
# Run in each terraform directory in reverse order (7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2)
terraform destroy
```

## Troubleshooting

### Frontend Won't Build

If `npm run build` fails:
1. Check Node.js version (needs 20+)
2. Delete `node_modules` and `.next` directories
3. Run `npm install` again
4. Check for TypeScript errors

### API Returns 401 Unauthorized

If API calls fail with 401:
1. Verify Clerk keys in `.env.local`
2. Check JWKS URL in Lambda environment variables
3. Sign out and sign in again
4. Check token expiry (Clerk tokens expire after 1 hour)

### Analysis Doesn't Start

If analysis stays pending:
1. Check SQS queue for messages
2. Verify planner Lambda has SQS trigger
3. Check CloudWatch logs for errors
4. Ensure Aurora cluster is running

### CloudFront Returns 403

If you get access denied:
1. Check S3 bucket policy
2. Verify CloudFront OAI has access
3. Wait 15 minutes for propagation
4. Try incognito browser window

### Charts Don't Display

If charts are blank:
1. Check browser console for errors
2. Verify chart data in job results
3. Check Recharts library loaded
4. Review charter agent output

## Architecture Best Practices

### Security Highlights

The application implements several security best practices:

1. **Authentication**: Clerk handles all auth complexity
2. **JWT Validation**: Every API request validates tokens
3. **HTTPS Only**: CloudFront enforces SSL
4. **Input Validation**: Pydantic validates all data
5. **CORS Protection**: Restricts origins
6. **Secrets Management**: Uses AWS Secrets Manager

### Performance Optimizations

1. **CDN Caching**: Static assets cached globally
2. **Code Splitting**: NextJS automatically splits bundles
3. **API Response Caching**: CloudFront caches GET requests
4. **Database Connection Pooling**: Data API handles pooling
5. **Parallel Agent Execution**: Agents run simultaneously

### Scalability Design

The architecture scales automatically:
- **CloudFront**: Handles millions of requests
- **API Gateway**: Auto-scales to demand
- **Lambda**: Concurrent execution up to 1000
- **Aurora Serverless**: Scales ACUs as needed
- **SQS**: Manages queue automatically

## Next Steps

Congratulations! You've deployed a complete AI-powered financial planning application!

### Explore Advanced Features

Try these additional features:
1. Create multiple accounts with different strategies
2. Test with international ETFs
3. Adjust retirement parameters
4. Export reports (print to PDF)

### Customize the Application

Ideas for enhancement:
- Add more chart types
- Implement portfolio rebalancing
- Add email notifications
- Create mobile app
- Integrate with brokerages

### Continue Learning

Proceed to [Guide 8](8_observability.md) where you'll add:
- Comprehensive monitoring with CloudWatch
- Distributed tracing with X-Ray
- Security scanning
- Performance optimization

## Summary

In this guide, you successfully:
- ✅ Set up Clerk authentication
- ✅ Deployed a React/NextJS frontend
- ✅ Created a FastAPI backend on Lambda
- ✅ Configured CloudFront CDN
- ✅ Tested portfolio management
- ✅ Ran multi-agent AI analysis
- ✅ Monitored costs and performance

Your Alex Financial Advisor is now live and ready for users! 🎉

## Quick Reference

### Key URLs
- **Frontend**: Your CloudFront URL
- **API Docs**: Your API Gateway URL + `/docs`
- **Clerk Dashboard**: https://dashboard.clerk.com

### Common Commands
```bash
# Local development
uv run run_local.py

# Deploy frontend
npm run build
uv run deploy.py

# Check costs
aws ce get-cost-and-usage --time-period Start=2024-01-01,End=2024-01-31 --granularity MONTHLY --metrics "UnblendedCost" --group-by Type=DIMENSION,Key=SERVICE

# View logs
aws logs tail /aws/lambda/alex-api --follow
```

### Cost Management
- Set up billing alerts
- Review costs weekly
- Destroy resources when not needed
- Use AWS Free Tier where possible

Excellent work completing the Alex Financial Advisor! 🚀
